Just think of it for a moment.
Those first faltering steps.
That baby, after probably a zillion attempts,
repeatedly trying, and failing..
Persists..
And then, that Instagram Moment..
My baby’s first standup, my baby’s first
steps, walk.. run..
They say, for the baby to just go face down
itself, is a huge effort!
What if it had given up at the “crawl stage”?
How would it even walk or run?
We encounter failure, but we also win sometimes.
But this baby?
Until the first win, it has always been a
failure.
Isn’t there a beautiful lesson to learn
from that baby?
Namaste!
Four hundred and fifty nine!
We have actually seen this topic before..
Failure..
And, what can we learn from those failures..
There are a few things that we haven’t touched
upon.
After all this is such a large subject..
So, we will look at a few items that we have
missed along the way!
First up, this is a precept we need to understand
very clearly.
THIS IS WRONG.
What is the process for Success?
It is NOT “Try and you shall Succeed”.
We need to stop spreading that myth.
Instead, the process in real life, is more
like this.
You Try, and hundred percent of the time,
you Fail.
Because, you are not sure of the right parameters
needed, the right definition of success either.
So, you Fail.
And then, if you have Passion, Guts, Stamina,
and if you probably dynamically reprogram
your Approach, you Try Again, you Fail Again,
and that cycle continues, until, one day,
you reach what they call Escape Velocity,
and you shoot off, and you reach Success.
So, Success is a long-drawn-out Process.
More like this than like that.
That is the first thing we need to internalise.
If we do that, half the problems of heartburn
that beset us, we will be saved from them.
There is this target..
To be “On Target”, there is just one right
way!
But, to be wrong about it?
You could go a bit to the left, a bit to the
right, you could overshoot, you could undershoot..
you may not probably have calculated for gravity
adjustments, or.. for windspeed perturbance..
How many different ways!
How many unique manners in which to screw
things up completely!
And, of course, simply because there are so
many ways to do things wrong, we can too learn
so many new lessons too!
When you succeed and win, there is probably
just one lesson to learn.
What is winning.
How to do it.
In that circumstance.
On that day.
But, when you screw up, there are a gazillion
number of lessons waiting to be taught..
If you approach with that open “learner
mindset”, failure, temporary failure, is
probably welcome!
Did you know that the same TED that hosts
those amazing talks, also publish mini-books
too?
Some very good TED talks, they convert into
short-form books, and one such book is this
one.
Called Save Our Science.
(Do you see the hidden SOS there?)
In this book, the author says, students, children,
should be encouraged to embrace failure.
We shouldn’t fill their minds with the top-level
concern of “Oh my God, I shouldn’t lose,
Oh my God, I shouldn’t make a mistake here”..
If we grow them up in that cocooned environment,
science will not survive in such an environment.
You need to have miserable failures, things
should blow up, and that is when science progresses.
Experimentation culture will flourish only
then.
“We have another word for it!”, says this
scientist.
“Failures?
We call it something else!
We call it DATA!”
How beautiful!
They call Failures, DATA!
Because, based on that data, they will create
what Success is.
That Data will guide them to the next level
of experimentation.
How beautiful!
This person you see here, he is Michael Chang.
This guy, American, a Chinese American, he
will be like a miniature..
A pocket replica.
Amazing tennis player.
He still holds some records I think.
One of them being, “The youngest player
to ever win a Grand Slam”.
I think he is still the holder of that record.
He is not all that talented or gifted, naturally.
Not exceptionally tall, no fast serves, no
great reflexes, nothing of that sort!
Even today, how many Chinese players do you
know, who play tennis?
You can count with the fingers of one hand!
Probably, you won’t even be able to start
the count!
In those days, he possessed just one talent.
Grit.
Fighter.
He used to say, “My coach taught me one
lesson.
Just one lesson, very deeply in my heart.
And, that’s what led me to all the victories.
Do you want to win in tennis?
That’s no blackmagic there, he used to say.
Just ensure you get the ball over the net
one more time than your opponent.”
Sounds a little ridiculous, a bit silly..
but, do you remember “Will it make the boat
go faster?”
Pretty much along the same lines, the lucid,
simple, distilled, fact of the matter, in
a game of tennis..
“Once more over the net than you!
You placing it to my left?
Take this.
You passing me on the right?
How about this!
I would tire my opponent out.
Once more.
Make that guy make a mistake.”
That was grit.
And, the moment I consider the concept of
grit, this is the book that comes to mind.
Angela Duckworth is the author.
She has researched what it means to be an
underdog.
She talks about how her father used to dismiss
her away as “You are not genius material.
Why were you even born”.. etc.
That lady, she has climbed the ladder.
She has become a researcher, in fact, jokingly
she remarks that she is now a genius researcher.
“My father isn’t around today, but if
he were around, I would like to tell him that!”
So, this lady, she comes up with a pseudo-mathematical
proof of what it means to achieve something.
I call it pseudo-mathematical because.. it
isn’t really rigorous mathematics, but addition,
subtraction, multiplication, these are popular
concepts that we have encountered often in
basic maths.. and, she uses those to teach
us, in a way that everybody can understand,
two important formulae.
She says, “There is Talent.
And, there is Achievement”.
What you are innately ABLE to do.
And, WHERE that has taken you.
If Achievement is to be reached through Talent,
first up, we need to derive something called
Skill, from Talent.
And, how do you do that?
Talent multiplied by Effort, is Skill.
Not enough if you have an innate Talent for
something.
You need to put in the Effort, to convert
it into a Skill.
When you put the effort, it will express itself
as a Skill.
Talent multiplied by Effort, is Skill.
Nice, simple, pseudo-mathematical formula.
And then, she says, for Skill to become an
Achievement, .. you CAN do something, you
have a Skill.
You have developed it.
And, using that, if you want to REACH somewhere,
how to Achieve..?
For that too, there is Effort needed.
So, simple mathematics..
Surely, you would have encountered this at
school.
What does this mean?
Talent multiplied by Effort-Squared, is Achievement.
What does that mean?
If you want to Achieve something, you surely
need Talent.
A random person cannot walk in and Achieve
something.
Agreed!
But, whatever importance we give Talent, we
need to dedicate MANY TIMES MORE IMPORTANCE
to Effort.
Exponentially more.
You need to give importance to Effort.
That is Grit.
Even after facing difficulties, even after
staring at defeat, even then, to grit your
teeth, and grind through..
“I will cross past the finish line, even
if it means I have to crawl..!”
That is Grit.
And, that is what converts Talent and Skill
into Achievement.
We have ALL gone through this phase.
Little Boy or Little Girl, Uncle Aunt Mom
or Dad behind us, guiding us, to ride a bicycle.
They all would have given us this advice,
surely.
“Hey, please remember.
We have always advised you to do things slow
and steady, not to hurry things, not to go
fast.. all this while.
But, for the first time I am telling you,
don’t go too slow..!
If you don’t go fast enough, you will not
be able to learn!”
And, how did we understand this pithy advice?!
“Oh, if we go slower than a threshold, the
cycle will buckle and fall..
We won’t have enough forward momentum..”
That is how we explained it to ourselves.
Yes, that’s true too.
But, there is another bit of advice hidden
there..
If you don’t go fast enough, if you don’t
push the limits of your environment, again,
you will not be able to learn.
So, don’t go slow..!
And, please don’t settle into a normal comfortable
speed either..!”
Continuing that analogy of the cycle, I am
sure you remember the Goldilocks Zone we have
talked about earlier.
What is that Goldilocks Zone?
Getting out of the comfort zone into the learning
zone..
This is a comfort zone..
A tricycle!
You can’t have a fall, with it.
Too easy.
You will be bored trying this.
This on the other hand is the panic zone.
The unicycle.
It is too hard.
I tried.
We have one at our office.
It is next to impossible to balance yourself.
You will panic, you will start hating the
art of riding itself.
So, between too easy and too hard, that’s
the Goldilocks Zone, and that is the cycle
we are all comfortable with.
This sounds theoretically right, conceptually
appropriate, we have seen this in earlier
Quotidians too.
Many books have talked about this.
But, recently, there was a research.
After all, there is much noise these days
about machine learning and artificial intelligence.
There was research done on a set of algorithms
and how they learn to identify brain tumour,
given a scan.
If we give it a scanned image, can the algorithm
find out if this is a normal brain or a tumoured
brain..
They are training it with existing data.
If we give it 100% good data, how does it
learn?
If we give it 50% data good data, how does
it learn?
And then, they found out only when the 85–15
principle is adhered to, that is, “Give
it data such that, 85% of the time, it guesses
correctly, and 15% of the time, it makes a
silly mistake, and you intervene to correct
that anomaly.. to educate that model and say,
“Hey, you have made a mistake here, you
need to correct it by doing this”..
That advice should happen 15% of the time.
That is when it morphs into the best learning
environment, ever.
Many research efforts were put into evaluating
a lot of machine-learning algorithms.
And, the scientists who worked on this say,
this is not true just with the machines..
it is true for human learning too.
If you are in a classroom, and if you have
been given a math problem to solve, or if
you have been challenged with a Lego set to
construct, too hard, too easy, not good learning
environments.
But, if it has been set up such that 85 percent
of the time it yields a win, and 15 percent
of the time we face a loss, then, true learning,
persistent learning happens.
So, losing is an important aspect in the game
of life.
If you consider the game of chess, you can’t
even hope to win without losing something
in the process.
You need to protect your King, you need to
attack the King of the opponent, .. just to
make way, you may have to sacrifice some of
your own pieces.
If you are going to be adamant about not losing
a single piece, you may never be able to win!
What can we learn from failure?
I have three lessons to share..
Lesson Number One, we learn about Emotions.
Victory is just one emotion.
Joy.
Unadulterated, unbridled Joy.
But, when you lose, you are Angry, you are
Disgusted, you are Sad, you are Angry.
How many Emotions!!
And, Emotional Intelligence is the need of
the hour!
To understand what you are going through,
to have an out-of-body experience to look
at yourself and do an evaluation of what you
are burning through..
It is a rare ability that so many of us today
miss.
If you want to practise that skill, you need
to face defeat and failure.
Here is another Lesson that we can learn only
by Losing.
You all remember the story of Ravana.
He had performed the most torturous of penances..
See this picture for example.
You see only nine heads up there..
The tenth one, he has severed, converted it
into the sound box of his Veena!
And he is singing the praise of the Lord.
To Lord Shiva.
And, he received some amazing boons too.
The boons he got protected him from Defeat.
He requests that he not be killed or defeated
by the Devas, the Kinnaras, the Gandharvas,
.. a whole long list.
But, he misses mentioning Humans!
And, that is because he doesn’t even consider
humans a credible threat.
And, that is what led to the Rama Avatar..
who came in as a human being.
A simple, normal, two-legged human being,
and defeats Ravana.
To get that all-important quality of Humility,
Victory and Success alone won’t be enough.
Only when you lose, you learn it is the form
of the day, it is the scope of the playing
field, that decides who is the winner.
And then, there is the third lesson.
The third lesson is, .. something that I have
often alluded to..
It is all about the Journey.
Not the Destination.
In this playground, we play nearly daily.
We play basketball.
And, when we form teams, .. I secretly (don’t
tell!) form the teams so that the other team
will have an easier game.
Why?
Well, you remember that adage — “Sometimes
I win, other times I learn!”.
You both play that one hour game.
Both the teams go through that process.
It is like when you are headed to the Sabari
Mala, on a pilgrimage.
It is a long arduous journey.
It is a marathon effort.
Winning, here, seems as ridiculous as exclaiming,
“Aha!
We both started days ago.
But, I am the first to reach the holy steps
of the temple!”
Go ahead!
Be my guest!
I enjoyed the passage, just like you did!
I saw the sights just like you did.
I prayed at every one of those little temples
along the way, just like you did.
What’s the big deal?!
We both have experienced and gained from that
journey.
That is the third lesson that Failure teaches
me.
Focus on the Journey.
Focus on the Exposure that you are getting.
As a Closing Thought then, at school, and
at college, many many people pay much money
as fees..
Many of us succeed.
Some of us succeed very well.
A few of us fall down the wayside.
And we fail..
And, this is what we think happens.
NO!
Turn it around.
Everyone of us succeeds.
Whoever sees failures as the stepping stones.
To put it simply, Failures, they are the FEES
you pay
to Succeed.
Only when you Fail, you know what it is to
Win.
Remember that!
And, all the best for your future Failures.
We will meet soon.
Thank you!